[red-knot] Method calls and the descriptor protocol (#16121)
astral-sh/ruff: crates/red_knot_python_semantic/resources/mdtest/call/methods.md

# Methods

## Background: Functions as descriptors

Say we have a simple class `C` with a function definition `f` inside its body:

```py
class C:
    def f(self, x: int) -> str:
        return "a"
```

Whenever we access the `f` attribute through the class object itself (`C.f`) or through an instance
(`C().f`), this access happens via the descriptor protocol. Functions are (non-data) descriptors
because they implement a `__get__` method. This is crucial in making sure that method calls work as
expected. In general, the signature of the `__get__` method in the descriptor protocol is
`__get__(self, instance, owner)`. The `self` argument is the descriptor object itself (`f`). The
passed value for the `instance` argument depends on whether the attribute is accessed from the class
object (in which case it is `None`), or from an instance (in which case it is the instance of type

> `C`). The `owner` argument is the class itself (`C` of type `Literal[C]`). To summarize:

Reviewer: it could be useful to link to the Descriptor HOWTO somewhere from this first paragraph (and possibly Brent's blogpost unravelling attribute access too!)

Author: Brent? :stuck_out_tongue: 

I linked to [this section](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/descriptor.html#functions-and-methods) in the descriptor guide now. We already refer to the full descriptor guide in `descriptor_protocol.md`, but this section is about `FunctionType.__get__` specifically.

Brett's post doesn't mention bound methods at all, but I'll probably link to that as well when I work on the follow up which distinguishes between `getattr_static`/`Type::static_member` and `find_name_in_mro` :+1:

- `C.f` is equivalent to `getattr_static(C, "f").__get__(None, C)`
- `C().f` is equivalent to `getattr_static(C, "f").__get__(C(), C)`

Here, `inspect.getattr_static` is used to bypass the descriptor protocol and directly access the

> function attribute. The way the special `__get__` method *on functions* works like is as follows. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function attribute. The way the special `__get__` method *on functions* works is as follows. In
```

> the former case, if the `instance` attribute is `None`, it simply returns the function itself. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the former case, if the `instance` argument is `None`, `__get__` simply returns the function itself. In
```

```

In conclusion, this is why we see the following two types when accessing the `f` attribute on the
class object `C` and on an instance `C()`:

```py
reveal_type(C.f)  # revealed: Literal[f]
reveal_type(C().f)  # revealed: <bound method `f` of `C`>
```

A bound method is a callable object that contains a reference to the `instance` that it was called
on (can be inspected via `__self__`), and the function object that it refers to (can be inspected
via `__func__`):

```py
bound_method = C().f

reveal_type(bound_method.__self__)  # revealed: C
reveal_type(bound_method.__func__)  # revealed: Literal[f]
```

When we call the bound method, the `instance` is implicitly passed as the first argument (`self`):

```py
reveal_type(C().f(1))  # revealed: str
reveal_type(bound_method(1))  # revealed: str
```

When we call the function object itself, we need to pass the `instance` explicitly:

```py
C.f(1)  # error: [missing-argument]

reveal_type(C.f(C(), 1))  # revealed: str
```

When we access methods from derived classes, they will be bound to instances of the derived class:

```py
class D(C):
    pass

reveal_type(D().f)  # revealed: <bound method `f` of `D`>
```

> If we access an attribute on a bound method object itself, it will defer to `types.MethodType`:

Reviewer: Fun Python esoteric knowledge that is probably irrelevant here, but which you may find interesting: if there are extra attributes present in a function's instance `__dict__` (e.g. attributes that have been monkey-patched onto the function), those attributes are also accessible from a bound method derived from the function. E.g.

```pycon
>>> def foo(self): pass
... 
>>> foo.bar = 42
>>> method = foo.__get__(object())
>>> method
<bound method foo of <object object at 0x1022307b0>>
>>> method.bar
42
>>> foo.bar = 56
>>> method.bar
56
```

I'm not sure exactly whether attributes are first looked up in the underlying function's instance dictionary or the class dictionary of `types.MethodType`.

Anyway, probably irrelevant for us here, as I say!

Author: Yes. Bound methods simply keep a reference to the function in a `im_func` member …

https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/10b32054ad6bce821e3b40101d4414d025be6e36/Objects/classobject.c#L124

… which they expose via `bound_method.__func__` here …

https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/10b32054ad6bce821e3b40101d4414d025be6e36/Objects/classobject.c#L161C32-L161C38

… and they fall back to looking up attributes on the function in `getattr` here:

https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/10b32054ad6bce821e3b40101d4414d025be6e36/Objects/classobject.c#L212

Reviewer: Ah yes, and of course that's visible from Python if you do something like this -- the attribute in the `MethodType` class dictionary takes precedence over the attribute in the function's instance dictionary!

```pycon
>>> def foo(): ...
... 
>>> foo.__hash__ = 42
>>> method = foo.__get__(object())
>>> method.__hash__
<method-wrapper '__hash__' of method object at 0x102ed0a40>
```

I was obviously lacking imagination last night 😄

via `__func__`):

```py
bound_method = C().f

reveal_type(bound_method.__self__)  # revealed: C
reveal_type(bound_method.__func__)  # revealed: Literal[f]
```

When we call the bound method, the `instance` is implicitly passed as the first argument (`self`):

```py
reveal_type(C().f(1))  # revealed: str
reveal_type(bound_method(1))  # revealed: str
```

When we call the function object itself, we need to pass the `instance` explicitly:

```py
C.f(1)  # error: [missing-argument]

reveal_type(C.f(C(), 1))  # revealed: str
```

When we access methods from derived classes, they will be bound to instances of the derived class:

```py
class D(C):
    pass

reveal_type(D().f)  # revealed: <bound method `f` of `D`>
```

If we access an attribute on a bound method object itself, it will defer to `types.MethodType`:

```py
reveal_type(bound_method.__hash__)  # revealed: <bound method `__hash__` of `MethodType`>
```

If an attribute is not available on the bound method object, it will be looked up on the underlying
function object. We model this explicitly, which means that we can access `__module__` on bound
methods, even though it is not available on `types.MethodType`:

```py

> reveal_type(bound_method.__module__)  # revealed: str

Author: Oops, thanks. And sorry for changing your original example. I wanted to choose something where we do not produce a `@Todo` type.
